>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, JUNE 25: THE DECISION
BY BRITISH VOTERS TO LEAVE THE
EUROPEAN UNION-- WE'LL ASSESS
THE IMPACT ON THE U.K. AND THE
U.S.
>> Reporter: I'M HARI
SREENIVASAN IN LONDON, WHERE THE
VOTE TO LEAVE THE E.U. AND THE
LONG-TERM IMPACTS ON THE U.K.
ECONOMY ARE JUST STARTING TO
SINK IN.
>> Stewart: AND THE PANAMA CANAL
GETS A MAKEOVER TO ACCOMMODATE
THE WORLD'S BIGGEST CONTAINER
SHIPS.
WILL GLOBAL TRADE GET A BOOST?
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
GREAT BRITAIN IS NOW GRAPPLING
WITH THE CONSEQUENCES OF ITS
VOTE TO EXIT THE EUROPEAN UNION.
TRADE, IMMIGRATION AND SECURITY
AGREEMENTS ARE ALL UP IN THE
AIR, AND TODAY E.U. OFFICIALS
BEGAN MEETING ON HOW TO HANDLE
THE DEPARTURE AND FIGURE OUT HOW
IMMINENT IT WILL BE.
TODAY WAS ALSO A DAY OF
RECKONING WITH A NEW REALITY FOR
A NATION OF 65 MILLION PEOPLE,
INCLUDING THE THREE MILLION E.U.
CITIZENS WHO LIVE IN THE U.K.
REPORTING FROM LONDON IS OUR OWN
HARI SREENIVASAN WITH TODAY'S
DEVELOPMENTS.
HARI?
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
ALISON.
EVEN THOUGH THE VOTE IS
OFFICIALLY OVER, FOR SOME HERE
IN THE U.K., THAT DOESN'T MEAN
THE CAMPAIGNING STOPS.
THAT DOESN'T MEAN THEY TRY TO
CHANGE THE OUTCOME.
A CROWD STILL IN DISBELIEF
GATHERED OUTSIDE LONDON'S
PARLIAMENT SQUARE TO PROTEST THE
REFERENDUM.
>> THERE'S SOMETHING NOT RIGHT
WITH THIS COUNTRY, AND WE REALLY
NEED TO MAKE SOME BIG CHANGES.
>> Reporter: AROUND TWO
MILLION BRITISH CITIZENS HAVE
SIGNED A PETITION ON
PARLIAMENT'S WEB SITE CALLING
FOR ANOTHER REFERENDUM, SAYING
THE 52% TO 48% VOTE TO EXIT THE
E.U. WAS NOT DECISIVE ENOUGH.
>> IT'S ALMOST LIKE A GRIEVING
PROCESS BECAUSE I FEEL THAT
PEOPLE DON'T KNOW WHAT THEY
VOTED FOR.
I FEEL LIKE THEY VOTED BASED ON
LIES.
>> GRIEF-STRICKEN, THAT'S THE
BEST WAY OF PUTTING IT.
IT'S JUST DREADFUL, JUST
DREADFUL.
WE'VE MADE OURSELVES A LAUGHING
STOCK IN THE WORLD.
>> Reporter: TODAY, THE TOP
BRITISH REPRESENTATIVE TO THE
E.U. IN BRUSSELS ANNOUNCED HE'LL
RESIGN HIS POST NEXT MONTH.
>> I FELT VERY CLEARLY THAT WE
SHOULD STAY IN, BUT THAT WASN'T
WHAT THE MAJORITY OF THE PEOPLE
IN THE COUNTRY THOUGHT.
AND NOW I THINK, WHEN THAT
HAPPENS, THERE'S NO POINT CRYING
OVER SPILT MILK.
>> Reporter: MEETING IN BERLIN,
SIX FOUNDING MEMBERS OF THE E.U.
SAID THEIR PRIORITY IS
MAINTAINING THE STABILITY OF
FINANCIAL MARKETS, AND THEY
CALLED FOR NEGOTIATIONS OVER THE
U.K.'S DEPARTURE TO BEGIN.
>> (translated): I HOPE THAT
WE WON'T GET INTO A CAT AND
MOUSE GAME HERE.
THAT ABSOLUTELY WOULDN'T SUIT
GREAT BRITAIN, AND ABOVE ALL IT
WOULDN'T SUIT THE EUROPEAN
UNION.
IT MUST BE CLEAR THAT THE PEOPLE
HAVE SPOKEN, AND THIS DECISION
MUST BE IMPLEMENTED.
>> Reporter: GERMAN CHANCELLOR
ANGELA MERKEL SAID TODAY SHE'S
"SAD" BRITAIN DECIDED TO QUIT
THE E.U., BUT THE REMAINING
MEMBER STATES SHOULD NOT RUSH
THE TRANSITION.
>> (translated): GREAT BRITAIN
MUST FOR THEMSELVES DEFINE-- AND
SURELY THERE WILL ALSO A
DISCUSSION PROCESS-- WHAT
RELATIONSHIP IT WANTS TO HAVE
WITH THE EUROPEAN UNION.
WE WILL SIT TOGETHER AS 27 AND
SEE IF IT'S TENABLE, FROM OUR
POINT OF VIEW AND ACCORDING TO
OUR INTERESTS.
>> Reporter: IN PARIS, CRAFTING
HIS RESPONSE, FRENCH PRESIDENT
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE MET AT THE
ELYSEE PALACE WITH LEADERS OF
FRANCE'S MAJOR POLITICAL
PARTIES.
FAR RIGHT LEADER MARINE LE PEN
CALLED FOR A REFERENDUM ON
FRANCE'S E.U. MEMBERSHIP, BUT
HOLLANDE REJECTED THE CALL.
ONE OF THE BIG QUESTIONS
REMAINING IS HOW THE BREXIT WILL
AFFECT THE U.K., THE FIFTH
LARGEST ECONOMY IN THE WORLD.
EARLIER TODAY, I SAT DOWN WITH
SWATI DHINGRA.
SHE'S AN ECONOMIST AT THE LONDON
SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS, AND SHE HAS
BEEN STUDYING THE POTENTIAL
IMPACT OF THE BREXIT EVER SINCE
THE REFERENDUM WAS ANNOUNCED.
IT'S NOT THEORETICAL ANYMORE.
>> OH, ABSOLUTELY NOT.
IT WAS NEVER THEORETICAL, BUT
NOW I THINK IT'S-- EARLIER IT
WAS A POSSIBILITY, NOW IT IS A
REALITY.
JUST TO GIVE YOU SORT OF
BALLPARK NUMBERS OF WHAT WE
THINK THE IMPACTS WILL BE, THE
NEXT FIVE YEARS AFTER THE
BREXIT, WE SHOULD EXPECT G.D.P.
TO DECLINE 1% TO 3%.
1% DECLINE MEANS 720 POUNDS
LOWER INCOME PER HOUSEHOLD PER
YEAR.
AND THIS IS A PERMANENT EFFECT
YOU WILL SEE.
THESE ARE NOT TRIVIAL EFFECTS.
THESE ARE GOING TO AFFECT THE
LIVES OF PEOPLE, THE ECONOMIC
PROSPERITY, AND ESPECIALLY THOSE
OF YOUNG PEOPLE WHO WILL BE
ENTERING THE JOB MARKET NOW.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU SAID THAT
THERE'S GOING TO BE COSTS TO
PEOPLE THAT ARE ENTERING THE JOB
MARKET NOW.
WHAT ARE THOSE?
>> SO WHAT WE KNOW FROM SORT OF
WORK WHICH HAS MAINLY BEEN DONE
FOR THE U.S., DURING THE
ECONOMIC DOWNTURNS, THE COHORTS
ENTERING THE JOB FORCE AT THE
TIME, THEY TEND TO EARN LOWER
WAGES THIS YEAR, OF COURSE,
BECAUSE THERE IS LOWER DEMAND
UPON THAT IS A 6% TO 8% TROP IN
WAGES IF YOU ENTER DURING AN
ECONOMIC DOWNTURN-- BY ECONOMIC
DOWNTURN I MEAN 1% HIGHER THAN
USUAL.
AND THAT EFFECT DOESN'T GO AWAY.
THE LARGE, PERSISTENT NEGATIVE
EFFECTS OF WAGES ON YOUNG
COLLEGE GRADUATES IF THEY ENTER
DURING A DOWNTURN, EVEN 15 YEARS
AFTERWARDS, THEY HAVE 2.5% LOWER
INCOME.
THEY ARE THE ONES WHO WILL BE
GROWING UP WITH THAT.
WITHIN THE U.K. I THINK WHAT IS
IMPORTANT IS THE LIFE OF
UNIVERSITY WILL BE UNDER THREAT.
AT THE MOMENT, WHAT THE U.K. HAS
WITH THE REST OF THE EUROPEAN
UNION ARE THESE PROGRAMS TO HAVE
EXCHANGES AND THEY'RE VERY, VERY
ACTIVE PROGRAMS.
THOSE ARE GOING TO COME INTO
QUESTION.
>> Sreenivasan: DOES IT TH
MAKE IT HARDER FOR EMPLOYERS TO
RECRUIT?
>> WE'RE ALREADY SEEING THAT
HAPPEN.
AS THE UNCERTAINTY DEVELOPS, I
THINK PEOPLE ARE GOING TO BE ON
A HIRING FREEZE, AND IT IS GOING
TO HAVE AN IMPACT ON THE POOL OF
SKILLED WORKERS AVAILABLE IN THE
COUNTRY.
IF AT THE MOMENT, YOU ARE A
LEGAL FIRM, YOU CAN HIRE ANY
LAWYER FROM ANYWHERE IN THE E.U.
THAT POOL WILL GET MUCH SMALLER
AND THAT WILL IMPOSE COSTS ON
BUSINESSES IN TERMS OF WHO THEY
ARE ABLE TO HIRE.
AND SMALL BUSINESSES ARE
CONCERNED ABOUT THIS ISSUES AS
WELL.
IF YOU WANT TO RECRUIT TEACHERS,
ARE YOU OKAY WITH SUDDENLY
HIRING AN E.U. IMMIGRANT
TEACHER.
AND HOW ABOUT THE ENGLISH
TEACHERS WHO GO TO SPAIN?
I THINK ALL OF THOSE THINGS HAVE
HAPPENED.
>> Sreenivasan: ALISON,
PROFESSOR DHINGRA ALSO TOLD
ME SOMETHING ELSE INTERESTING.
SHE SAID UNIVERSITY SYSTEMS
AROUND THE U.K. ARE ALSO GOING
TO HAVE TO FIGURE OUT WHAT
HAPPENS IF A LARGE SOURCE OF
THEIR REVENUE-- MEANING STUDENTS
COMING FROM THE E.U.-- STARTS TO
SLOW DOWN.
TOMORROW, WE'RE GOING TO TAKE A
LOOK AT IMMIGRANTS WHO COME HERE
TO WORK, AND HOW UNCERTAIN THEY
ARE ABOUT THEIR FUTURES BECAUSE
OF THIS REFERENDUM.
>> Stewart: HARI SREENIVASAN,
REPORTING FROM LONDON.
WE LOOK FORWARD TO YOUR REPORT.
THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: THANKS, ALISON.
>> Stewart: THE UNITED KINGDOM
IS MADE UP OF ENGLAND, WALES,
NORTHERN IRELAND AND SCOTLAND.
FEWER THAN TWO YEARS AGO,
SCOTLAND HELD A REFERENDUM TO
LEAVE THE U.K., AND IT FAILED.
BUT AFTER THE U.K. DECISION TO
EXIT THE E.U., SCOTTISH LEADER
NICOLA STURGEON HAS BEEN CALLING
FOR ANOTHER INDEPENDENCE VOTE,
IN PART TO PROTECT SCOTLAND'S
E.U. MEMBERSHIP.
MARTIN GEISSLER FROM I.T.N. NEWS
HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: THE SCOTTISH
CABINET CALLED AN EMERGENCY
MEETING THIS MORNING.
THEY HAVE A LOT TO DISCUSS.
VOTERS HERE MADE ONE THING CLEAR
ON THURSDAY-- WHATEVER BRITAIN
THINKS, THEY WANT TO STAY IN THE
E.U.
NICOLA STURGEON HAS VOWED TO
PROTECT THEIR INTERESTS,
WHATEVER THAT TAKES.
>> WESTMINSTER IS ENGULFED IN
POLITICAL TURMOIL, AND AS A
VACUUM OF LEADERSHIP DEVELOPS, I
WANT TO MAKE CLEAR THAT SCOTLAND
IS LED BY A STABLE AND
EFFECTIVE GOVERNMENT.
WE ARE FOCUSED ON MAKING SURE
THAT SCOTLAND'S INTERESTS ARE
PROTECTED.
>> Reporter: SHE'LL TALK TO
EUROPEAN INSTITUTIONS AND
GOVERNMENTS, SHE SAID, AND A
LEGAL FRAMEWORK IS BEING DRAWN
UP FOR ANOTHER INDEPENDENCE
REFERENDUM.
IT MAY YET COME TO THAT.
NICOLA STURGEON HAS DEVOTED HER
ADULT LIFE TO THE PUSH FOR
SCOTTISH INDEPENDENCE, BUT SHE
DIDN'T WANT IT LIKE IT THIS.
UNDER NORMAL CIRCUMSTANCES THIS
WOULD BE A DREADFUL TIME TO HOLD
ANOTHER REFERENDUM, BUT SINCE
THURSDAY, EVERYTHING HAS
CHANGED.
OFFICIAL DUTIES TOOK THE FIRST
MINISTER TO GLASGOW THIS
AFTERNOON FOR ARMED FORCED DAY.
SHE MAY BE PREPARING FOR BATTLE,
BUT SHE LEADS A NATION THAT IS
AS DIVIDED AS EVER.
>> I JUST DON'T THINK WE CAN GO
ON OUR OWN.
I DON'T THINK IT'S A GOOD THING
TO LEAVE THE E.U., EITHER.
I THINK THE LAST THING IS TO GO
INDEPENDENT.
>> THE ANSWER IS A SECOND
INDEPENDENCE REFERENDUM.
HOPEFULLY A BETTER SCOTLAND AND
A BETTER FUTURE AND MORE
CONTROL.
>> I THINK WE'VE BEEN THROUGH
ENOUGH RECENTLY.
I THINK IT'S REALLY GOING TO
MAKE PEOPLE ILL, ACTUALLY.
I REALLY DON'T WANT ANOTHER ONE.
>> Reporter: THE UNITED
KINGDOM MAY HAVE MADE ITS
DECISION, BUT THIS PLACE STILL
HAS A LOT OF THINKING TO DO.
MARTIN GEISSLER, I.T.V. NEWS,
GLASGOW.
>> Stewart: BRITAIN IS THE
UNITED STATES' CLOSEST
DIPLOMATIC AND MILITARY ALLY IN
EUROPE, AND TOP ECONOMIC
PARTNER.
A FIFTH OF U.S. EXPORTS TO
EUROPE GO TO THE U.K., AND SO
DOES MORE THAN $500 MILLION OF
DIRECT U.S. INVESTMENT EVERY
YEAR.
TO ADDRESS HOW BREXIT COULD
AFFECT THE U.S. GOVERNMENT
RELATIONS AND AMERICAN BUSINESS
OPERATIONS IN THE U.K. AND
EUROPE, I AM JOINED BY CAMERON
ABADI, A SENIOR EDITOR OF
"FOREIGN POLICY" MAGAZINE.
WHAT ARE THE IMPLICATIONS FOR
U.S. COMPANIES THAT USE THE U.K.
AS A BASE, AND AN ENTRY POINT TO
BUSINESS IN EUROPE?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, A LOT OF
COMPANIES USE BRITAIN PRECISELY
THAT WAY.
SO YOU CITED HOW IMPORTANT AN
ECONOMIC PARTNER THAT IS.
BUT IT'S HARD TO DISENTANGLE HOW
MUCH OF THAT PARTNERSHIP IS
ABOUT BRITAIN AND HOW MUCH OF
THAT IS ABOUT EUROPE.
AND I THINK IT'S SAFE TO SAY A
LOT OF THAT IS ABOUT USING
BRITAIN TO GET ACCESS TO THE
MUCH BIGGER MARKET IN EUROPE.
NOW THAT BRITAIN HAS DECIDED
IT'S NOT PART OF THAT MARKET--
OR AT LEAST TEMPORARILY WON'T BE
PART OF THAT MARKET-- A LOT OF
COMPANIES ARE GOING TO HAVE
TO
CALCULATE WHETHER IT MAKES SENSE
TO STAY IN BRITAIN.
AND A LOT OF COMPANIES HAVE SAID
THAT IN THE RUN-UP TO THE VOTE
AND WE'LL SEE IN THE WEEKS AHEAD
WHETHER THEY START TO MOVE THEIR
OPERATIONS AWAY FROM BRITAIN AND
MOVE IT ELSEWHERE ON THE
EUROPEAN CONTINENT.
>> Stewart: LET'S TALK ABOUT
TRADE, WHAT THE IMPACT WILL BE
ON TRADES, ESPECIALLY WITH
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S TRANSATLANTIC
TRADE PARTNERSHIP DEAL.
WHAT DOES THE FUTURE HOLD
FOR U.S. TRADE WITH U.K.?
>> YEAH, YOU KNOW, THAT
TRANSATLANTIC PARTNERSHIP DEAL
WAS THE TOP PRIORITY OF THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION WITH
REGARDS TO EUROPE, PROBABLY
SINCE THE BEGINNING OF OBAMA'S
FIRST TERM.
I MEAN, THAT WAS WHAT HE SAID
FROM THE OUTSET WAS THE MOST
IMPORTANT THING ON HIS AGENDA.
NOW THAT THE EUROPEAN UNION IS
IN A CRISIS, NOW THAT THE MOST
PRO-FREE-TRADE COUNTRY IN EUROPE
HAS TAKEN A STEP BACK, IT'S NOT
CLEAR IF THAT TRADE
PARTNERSHIP-- WHICH WAS VERY
CLOSE TO HAPPENING, WHICH BY ALL
ACCOUNTS WAS SORT OF THIRD
BASE-- IT'S NOT CLEAR WHAT IS
GOING TO HAPPEN TO THAT AND
PROBABLY NOT GOING TO BE ABLE TO
BE PASSED BEFORE OBAMA LEAVES
OFFICE.
>> Stewart: LET'S TALK ABOUT
THE U.K.'S AND U.S.' POLITICAL
ALLIES AS SUPPORTS ONE ANOTHER.
HOW WILL BREXIT AFFECT THAT
RELATIONSHIP, ESPECIALLY SINCE
THEY'RE DEALING WITH DIPLOMATIC
ISSUES THAT OTHER COUNTRIES
DON'T NECESSARILY AGREE WITH THE
U.S. ON.
>> BRITAIN HAS BEEN A
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE U.S. FOR A
LONG TIME AND SEES A LOT OF
ISSUES IN THE WORLD THE SAME WAY
AS THE U.S. DOES.
TO THAT EXTENT, BRITAIN HAS BEEN
UNITED STATES' VOICE IN THE ROOM
IN THE EUROPEAN UNION.
WHEN IT COMES TO A FOREIGN
POLICY QUESTION LIKE RUSSIA, YOU
HAVE COUNTRIES IN EUROPE, LIKE
GERMANY AND FRANCE, WHO HAVE HAD
DIFFERENT RELATIONS, THAT HAVE
SORT OF TRIED TO BE MORE WARMER
RAPPROCHEMENT RELATIONSHIP WITH
RUSSIA.
BRITAIN HAS BEEN OUR SORT OF
VOICE IN THE ROOM OF HAVING A
TOUGHER LINE AGAINST A PLACE
LIKE RUSSIA.
NOW THAT BRITAIN IS NO LONGER
GOING TO BE PART OF DIPLOMATIC
DELIBERATIONS IN EUROPE, I THINK
THE UNITED STATES IS GOING TO
HAVE A TOUGHER TIME WINNING
EUROPE OVER FOR THOSE BIG
FOREIGN POLICY QUESTIONS, LIKE
RUSSIA.
>> Stewart: THERE HAS TO BE A
WHO OR A WHAT, A COUNTRY, AND A
GOVERNMENT THAT MIGHT TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF BREXIT AND TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF THIS TURMOIL.
WHO MIGHT THAT BE?
WHAT ARE SOME POSSIBILITIES?
>> WELL, I JUST MENTIONED
RUSSIA.
RUSSIA SEEMS TO BE-- HAS LONG
WANTED TO BE THE MOST POWERFUL
COUNTRY ON THE EUROPEAN
CONTINENT.
THAT'S BEEN THEIR STRATEGY GOING
BACK CENTURIES.
AND IT'S BEEN TRUE IN THE LAST
COUPLE OF YEARS.
WE'VE SEEN THEN ACT AGGRESSIVELY
ON THE BORDER WITH EUROPE.
NOW THAT THEY SMELL A LITTLE
WEAKNESS IN EUROPE, I THINK IT'S
SAFE TO SAY WE MAY SOON SEE THEM
TRYING TO PROBE THAT BORDER,
TRYING TO FIND OTHER AREAS OF
WEAKNESS TO TEST.
NOW THAT BRITAIN IS NO LONGER A
PART-- STRONG MILITARY, IS NO
LONGER PART OF THE EUROPEAN
UNION THEY MAY TRY TO TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF THAT.
>> Stewart: THE ANALOGY
EVERYBODY HAS BEEN SAYING IS,
THIS IS A DIVORCE.
WILL THIS BE A KNOCK-DOWN,
DRAG-THEM-OUT DIVORCE, GO-TO-
MEDIATION-AND-PLAY-NICE DIVORCE,
OR A QUICKIE DIVORCE?
>> THAT IS EXACT LET'S QUESTION
PEOPLE ARE WONDERING, AND I
THINK IT COMES DOWN TO A LAW, A
PROVISION CALLED ARTICLE 50.
THAT WAS WRITTEN SPOT EUROPEAN
TREATIES WHEN THEY WROTE IT.
IT'S NOT CLEAR THEY THOUGHT
ANYONE WOULD ACTUALLY USE THAT.
BUT NOW THAT THEY ARE WE'LL SEE
WHETHER IT'S GOING TO BE A
SMOOTH PROCESS OR IT'S GOING TO
BE SOMETHING WHERE EUROPE TRIES
TO PUNISH BRITAIN FOR EXITING.
AND THE REASONING FOR THAT WOULD
BE, WELL, WE WANT TO-- EUROPEAN
COUNTRIES MIGHT WANT TO DETER
OTHER COUNTRIES FROM TAKING THIS
KIND OF STEP.
SO THE BEST WAY TO DO THAT MAY
BE TO PUNISH BRITAIN ON THE WAY
OUT.
BRITAIN SEEMS TO THINK, OR THE
LEAVE CAMPAIGN ARGUED THAT THEY
WOULD GET A SWEETHEART DEAL
BECAUSE THEY'RE A BIG ENOUGH
ECONOMY.
BUT I THINK-- I THINK THE
INCENTIVES TO PUNISH BRITAIN
MAY-- MAY WIN OUT.
>> Stewart: CAMERON ABADI FROM
"FOREIGN POLICY" MAGAZINE,
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Stewart: READ EIGHT THINGS
YOU DIDN'T KNOW ABOUT THE
EUROPEAN UNION.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Stewart: WEST VIRGINIA'S
GOVERNOR IS ASKING FOR A FEDERAL
MAJOR DISASTER DECLARATION TO
ASSIST THE MOST SEVERELY FLOODED
PARTS OF HIS STATE.
AT LEAST 23 PEOPLE HAVE DIED IN
FLOODS TRIGGERED BY TEN INCHES
OF RAIN IN THE PAST 48 HOURS.
MORE THAN 60 ROADS WERE CLOSED
TODAY, AND MORE THAN 100 HOMES
HAVE BEEN DESTROYED.
EMERGENCY RESPONDERS RESCUED
DOZENS OF PEOPLE FROM ROOFTOPS
AND FROM THEIR CARS.
500 PEOPLE SPENT LAST NIGHT IN A
SHOPPING CENTER, STRANDED THERE
WHEN A BRIDGE WASHED OUT.
32,000 HOMES AND BUSINESSES IN
WEST VIRGINIA WERE WITHOUT POWER
TODAY.
A WILDFIRE IN CENTRAL CALIFORNIA
HAS KILLED TWO PEOPLE AND
DESTROYED AT LEAST 100 HOMES.
THE FIRE BROKE OUT THURSDAY
ABOUT 40 MILES FROM BAKERSFIELD
AND HAS SPREAD TO MORE THAN 55
SQUARE MILES.
800 FIREFIGHTERS HAVE BATTLED
THE FIRE; ANOTHER 1,500 HOMES
REMAIN THREATENED.
VENEZUELA IS ONE STEP CLOSER TO
HOLDING A VOTE TO RECALL ITS
PRESIDENT, NICHOLAS MADURO.
ELECTION OFFICIALS ARE REVIEWING
THE PETITION AFTER HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS OF VENEZUELANS STOOD
IN LINE FOR HOURS YESTERDAY TO
VALIDATE THEIR SIGNATURES WITH
FINGERPRINTS.
OPPOSITION LEADERS SAY THE
NUMBER OF SIGNATURES EXCEEDS THE
NUMBER REQUIRED, BUT THEY'LL
NEED TO GATHER FOUR MILLION NEW
SIGNATURES ON A SECOND PETITION
TO MAKE THE RECALL HAPPEN.
THE OPPOSITION BLAMES MADURO'S
SOCIALIST POLICIES FOR HIGH
INFLATION AND SHORTAGES OF FOOD
AND BASIC GOODS.
THE AL QAEDA-LINKED GROUP AL
SHABAB HAS CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR TODAY'S
ATTACK ON A HOTEL IN SOMALIA'S
CAPITAL OF MOGADISHU.
POLICE SAY AT LEAST 14 PEOPLE
WERE KILLED WHEN FOUR MILITANTS
BEGAN SHOOTING HOTEL GUESTS
AFTER DETONATING A CAR BOMB AT
THE HOTEL'S GATE.
POLICE LATER KILLED TWO OF THE
ATTACKERS.
>> Stewart: THE CENTURY-OLD
PANAMA CANAL IS A VITAL LIFELINE
FOR GLOBAL TRADE, A SHORTCUT
CONNECTING THE PACIFIC AND
ATLANTIC OCEANS AND CARRYING A
THIRD OF ASIA-TO-AMERICA'S
TRADE.
TOMORROW, THE 50-MILE CANAL
OFFICIALLY OPENS A NEW ERA AFTER
A NINE-YEAR, $5.5 BILLION EFFORT
TO WIDEN THE WATERWAY FOR THE
WORLD'S BIGGEST CARGO SHIPS.
DAVID BRANCACCIO, THE HOST OF
THE "MARKETPLACE MORNING REPORT"
FROM AMERICAN PUBLIC MEDIA,
RECENTLY WENT TO PANAMA TO SEE
THE NEW AND IMPROVED CANAL.
HE JOINS ME NOW TO TALK ABOUT
WHAT HE SAW.
LET'S DO BASICS FIRST, DAVID.
WHY WAS THERE A NEED FOR A $5.5
BILLION PROJECT LIKE THIS?
>> WELL, THE OTHER ONE WAS 100
YEARS OLD.
BUT, YOU KNOW, VINTAGE.
THAT'S NOT BAD.
IT'S TOO THIN.
AND SOMETHING MAGICAL HAPPENED
AFTER THEY STARTED TO PLAN THE
NEW CANAL THAT IS REALLY GOING
TO HELP, I THINK, PANAMA.
WHICH IS THE ENERGY BOON IN THE
UNITED STATES.
FRACKING PRODUCED A LOT OF
NATURAL GAS, A LOT OF
LIQUIFIED NATURAL GAS.
ASIAN CUSTOMERS LOVE THAT STUFF.
THE TANKERS THAT CARRY OUR
LIQUIFIED NATURAL GAS FROM THE
GULF DON'T FIT, DON'T FIT,
THEY'RE JUST TOO BIG, SO
THE NEW CANAL WILL ACCOMMODATE
THEM.
AND SHIPS HAVE GOTTEN BIGGER AND
BIGGER IN THE 100 YEARS SINCE
THE OLD CANAL, 102 YEARS SINCE
THE OLD CANAL OPENED UP.
AND THE SUEZ CANAL WAS TAKING
AWAY A LOT OF PANAMA'S BUSINESS.
AND THE BIGGEST POSSIBLE CARGO
SHIPS IN THE WORLD, STILL WON'T
FIT THE NEW PANAMA CANAL, BUT
WAY BIGGER ONES WILL.
IN FACT, THEY'RE SO BIG THAT WE
HAVE TO UPGRADE OUR PORTS HERE
IN THE UNITED STATES.
EVEN AS WE SPEAK, IN THE PORT OF
NEW YORK, NEWARK, THEY HAVE TO
RAISE A HUGE BRIDGE TO LET THE
NEW POST-PANAMAX VESSELS,
THEY'RE CALLED, GET IN.
AND THOSE INFRASTRUCTURE
UPGRADES WON'T BE READY FOR A
LITTLE WHILE.
>> Stewart: I DON'T WANT TO
BURY THE LEAD HERE.
YOU WENT TO PANAMA.
YOU GOT TO SEE IT UP CLOSE.
PLEASE EXPLAIN THE GEE-WHIZ PART
OF IT AND THE HIGHS OF AND LOWS
OF GETTING THIS DONE.
>> I GOT TO HANG OUT WITH THE
TUG BOAT CAPTAIN AND THERE WAS
THE NEW ONE READY TO OPEN.
THE OLD ONES HAVE THESE
JAWS, AND OPEN UP FOR THE LOCKS.
THE NEW ONES HAVE KIND OF A
SLIDING PATIO DOOR.
BUT THEY'RE JUST MUCH, MUCH
LARGER.
THEY THOUGHT A LOT ABOUT
CONSERVATION, PARTICULAR HE
WATER CONSERVATION, AND THEY'VE
TRIED TO REFOREST WHERE THEY
DEFORESTED, AND IT CREATED
ABOUT 40,000 JOBS.
INTERESTINGLY, GIANT
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS TEND TO
GO WILDLY OVER-BUDGET.
THE PANAMANIANS KEPT A LID ON
THIS.
IT'S A VERY INTERESTING CASE
STUDY OF AN EMERGING MARKET
COUNTRY THAT HAS A GIANT
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT THAT IS
RUN, INTERNATIONAL EXPERTS TOLD
ME, REALLY QUITE WELL.
>> Stewart: THE "NEW YORK
TIMES" DESCRIBED THIS AS "A
RISKY BET."
WHAT'S RISKY ABOUT IT?
>> THERE ARE A LOT OF RISKS.
FIRST OF ALL, THE THING SPRUNG A
LEAK DURING ITS CONSTRUCTION, I
AM TOLD BY AUTHORITIES, THEY
FIXED THAT.
ONE HOPES THEY DID.
THERE ARE SOME OTHER RISKS.
APPARENTLY EARTHQUAKE RISK WAS
RAISED AS AN ISSUE IN THE "NEW
YORK TIMES" ARTICLE.
AND OTHERS.
THE BIGGEST RISK-- SOMEHOW THE
"NEW YORK TIMES" MISSED, BUT WE
TRIED TO FOCUS ON OUR COVERAGE--
WORLD TRADE, PLANET EARTH, THE
WHOLE WORLD.
TRADE HAS ACTUALLY TAPERED OFF
IN THE YEARS SINCE THE
2008-2009 FINANCIAL COLLAPSE.
IT'S NOT ANYTHING DOWN, BUT
TRADE GROWTH IS MUCH SLOWER THAN
IT WAS.
COULD BE A CYCLE.
WAIT A LITTLE WHILE, IT WILL
COME BACK.
THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO ARGUE THAT
IS THE CASE.
AND CHINA, IT'S RESTRUCTURING
ITS ECONOMY.
THE MESS IN EUROPE.
BUT THIS, TOO, SHALL PASS.
TRADE WILL COME BACK.
OTHERS TELL US, MAYBE ALL THIS
GLOBALIZATION THAT WE'VE TALKED
ABOUT, ALISON, FOR 30 YEARS NOW,
MAYBE IT'S KIND OF RUN ITS
COURSE.
TRADE WILL STILL GROW A LITTLE
BIT.
IT WILL BE SIGNIFICANT.
BUT IT WON'T BE THE BIG STORY IT
USED TO BE.
SO THAT DYNAMIC HAS TO PLAY OUT.
THAT'S ONE OF THE BIG RISKS.
>> Stewart: WHAT DO YOU THINK
COULD BE AN UNINTENDED
CONSEQUENCE OF THIS?
WE KNOW WHY THEY DID IT, WHAT
THEY WANTED TO ACCOMPLISH.
FROM YOUR REPORTING, IS THERE
ANYTHING YOU THINK THAT COULD BE
AN OUTGROWTH OF THIS THAT NO ONE
EXPECTED?
>> WHEN I WAS IN PANAMA I DIDN'T
JUST STARE AT THE CANAL.
I LOOKED AT THE COUNTRY.
AND IT'S A KIND OF SINGAPORE IN
A WAY.
THERE ARE ALL THESE FINANCIAL
SERVICES.
THE CANAL IS CERTAINLY NOT THE
ONLY GAME IN TOWN.
GROWTH OF PANAMA HAS BEEN DOUBLE
THE RATE OF THE SURROUNDING
COUNTRIES.
BUT THE GAP BETWEEN RICH AND
POOR REMAINS VERY WIDE IN
PANAMA.
THERE HAVE BEEN SOME
IMPROVEMENTS IN PANAMA IN
RECEIPT YEARS.
THEY'VE NARROWED THE GAP A BIT,
BUT SOME CRITICS SAY NOT NEARLY
ENOUGH, AND MANY PANAMANIANS
SAY THAT.
I WAS TALKING TO A VERY
EXPERIENCED JOURNALIST WHO
STARTED A BIG NEWSPAPER IN
PANAMA CITY AND SAID I GOT A
CRAZY IDEA, SORT OF A QUIXOTIC
QUEST HE HAS.
YOU COULD NARROW THE GAP
BETWEEN RICH AND POOR-- WHICH IS
SO STRIKING WHEN YOU TRAVEL
THROUGH PANAMA CITY-- YOU COULD
NARROW IT BY TAKING ALL OF THE
PROFITS OF THE CANAL EACH YEAR
AND DEDICATING IT TO IMPROVING
PANAMA'S SCHOOLS.
IT WOULD DOUBLE THE PANAMANIAN
SCHOOL BUDGET.
SO ONE UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCE IS
PERHAPS IF A-- AN INTERESTING
IDEA THAT THIS GUY HAS WERE TO
GET TRACTION, THAT PERHAPS IT
COULD HAVE A MORE WIDER EFFECT
THAN OTHER ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
HAS IN IMPROVING THE LIVES OF
AVERAGE PANAMANIANS.
>> Stewart: WE ALL LEARNED
ABOUT THE PANAMA CANAL GROWING
UP IN HIGH SCHOOL AND JUNIOR
HIGH SCHOOL.
IT WAS A BIG PART OF EVERY
HISTORY CURRICULUM.
IN YOUR OPINION WILL THIS
CHANGE, WILL THIS MODIFICATION
BE EQUALLY AS IMPORTANT?
>> I THINK MOVING GOODS ON
CONTAINERS, IT WILL STILL BE
HERE, AND PANAMA CANAL WILL
STILL BE RELEVANT.
HAD THEY NOT DONE THE
IMPROVEMENT, HAD THEY NOT DONE
THIS WIDENING, OPENING NOW, THEY
WOULD HAVE BEEN IN DANGER OF
BEING OBSOLETE.
>> Stewart: DAVID BRANCACCIO,
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> A PLEASURE.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Stewart: THIS TUESDAY ON PBS,
"FRONTLINE" EXPLORES POLICING
AND RACE WITH A JOURNEY INSIDE
NEWARK, NEW JERSEY'S POLICE
FORCE, OPERATING UNDER MANDATED
CIVIL RIGHTS REFORMS.
IN THIS EXCERPT FROM "POLICING
THE POLICE," NEWARK MAYOR RAS
BARAKA DISCUSSES THE CHALLENGES
AT HAND.
>> I MET UP WITH RAS ONE DAY,
WHILE HE WAS TOURING SOME
PRECINCTS.
WE WENT OUT WITH THE GANG UNIT.
YOU'RE GOING AROUND AND GIVING
ILLEGAL GUNS.
HOW DOES THAT HAPPEN WITHOUT
BEING THE SAME SORTS OF POLICING
THAT PEOPLE ARE PROTESTING
ABOUT?
>> INTELLIGENCE.
WHO IS ACTUALLY SOMEBODY YOU
SHOULD PROBABLY STOP AND
SOMEBODY WHO IS JUST MISS
MARTHA'S KID GOING TO THE STORE
WITH HIS HAT IN THE BACK.
THAT INTELLIGENCE GETS YOU
INFORMATION NOT JUST LIKE RANDOM
STOPS.
THAT'S NOT HOW YOU POLICE.
I MEAN, THAT RIGHT THERE IS
RACISM.
>> BLACK AND BROWN COPS.
>> SO WHAT.
>> THE POLICE FORCE.
>> IT'S NOT THE WHO DID IT THAT
MAKES IT RACISM.
TO ME IT'S THE FACT THAT
OVERWHELMINGLY IT HAPPENS TO ONE
SPECIFIC GROUP OF PEOPLE IS WHAT
MAKES IT RACISM.
>> IS THERE A POINT WHERE YOU
LOOK AROUND AND GO, THIS IS
GOING TO BE EVEN HARDER THAN I
THOUGHT IT WOULD BE?
>> OH, YEAH.
IT DIDN'T GET THIS WAY IN FIVE
YEARS OR 10 YEARS, AND IT'S NOT
GOING TO TAKE FIVE OR 10 YEARS
TO GET OUT OF IT.
I MEAN, YOU'VE GOT GENERATIONAL
POVERTY, GENERATIONAL
UNEMPLOYMENT.
THESE BUILDINGS THAT HAVE BEEN
VACANT FOR 30, 40 YEARS, SO THEY
DIDN'T JUST GET VACANT WHEN I
BECAME THE MAYOR.
AT THE END OF THE DAY, THERE'S
NO TAX BASE LIKE THE WAY YOU
NEED IT.
AND YOU'RE TRYING TO RUN THE
STATE'S LARGEST CITY, IN THOSE
KINDS OF CONDITIONS, THIS IS
WHAT WE'RE DEALING WITH, MAN.
>> Stewart: FINALLY TONIGHT,
POPE FRANCIS IS CALLING ON
ARMENIA AND TURKEY TO TAKE A
PATH TOWARDS RECONCILIATION.
IN ARMENIA TODAY, THE POPE
VISITED A MEMORIAL TO THE 1915
MASSACRES OF 1.5 MILLION
CHRISTIAN ARMENIANS AT THE HANDS
OF OTTOMAN TURKS DURING WORLD
WAR I.
THE POPE REFERRED TO THE EVENT
AS A "GREAT EVIL AND A
GENOCIDE," A TERM TURKEY
REJECTS, CALLING THE POPE'S
STATEMENT "VERY UNFORTUNATE."
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT.